README.md, before:

# Sampling via Föllmer Flow
This repo contains the implementation for the paper [Sampling via Föllmer Flow](https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.03660)

## Brief

We introduce a novel **unit-time ODE flow** called the Föllmer flow, which efficiently transforms a Gaussian measure into a desired target measure at time 1. We apply Euler's method, where the velocity field is calculated either analytically or through **Monte Carlo** approximation using Gaussian samples. Time evolution of Föllmer flow on 8-mode gaussian mixtures is illustrated below:

![evolution](assets/evolution.png)

Through numerical experiments on mixture distributions in 1D, 2D, and  high-dimensional spaces, we demonstrate that the samples generated by our proposed flow exhibit **higher quality** compared to those obtained by several existing methods, especially for **multimodal** problems.

We also propose leveraging the Föllmer flow as a **warmstart** strategy for existing Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods, aiming to mitigate mode collapses and enhance their performance.

We can also leverage deep neural networks to fit  the trajectory of sample evaluations. This allows us to obtain a generator for **one-step** sampling as a result.

## Dependencies

```bash
pip install -r requirements
``` 

## Assets

Our assets (Föllmer flow/MCMC samples(.npz), neural Föllmer flow checkpoints(.pth), tables(.csv) and figures(.pdf,.png)) have been uploaded to [Google drive](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1GKR-L5Ak6dhPad8OP72oRP1EGJObIeZW?usp=sharing).

## Usage

```bash
.
├── Makefile
├── README.md
├── assets
├── distribution.py # abstract base class for general distribution, we implemented n-D Gaussian mixtures here
├── example.py # correspond to examples in table 3 of our paper
├── fflow.py # prototype of Föllmer flow
├── main.py # entrance for different routines (generate samples, train/eval networks)
├── mcmc.py # MCMC samplers prototype, modified from https://github.com/Tom271/LangevinMC/blob/master/langevin_traj.py
├── metric.py # compute MMD and W2 distance
├── misc.py # miscellaneous helper utilities
├── network.py # ResNet prototype
├── reproduce.py # entrance file to reproduce tables and figures from paper
├── requirements.txt
└── run.sh # bash scripts, calling main.py
```

Setup the name of your python environment in [run.sh](run.sh).

We provide bash scripts for generating samples in [`run.sh`](run.sh). If you wish to know how to use the entrance file [`main.py`](main.py), please refer to it for example.
```bash
./run.sh 1d # sampling from example 1 - 3, with Föllmer flow & MCMC
./run.sh 2d # sampling from example 4 - 10, with Föllmer flow & MCMC
./run.sh 2dmc # sampling from example 4 - 10, with MC Föllmer flow
./run.sh precondition # sampling from example 5, with different preconditioners
./run.sh hybrid # sampling from example 7, with predictor-corrector scheme
./run.sh nd # sampling from example 11 - 19, dimension ranges from 1 to 10
./run.sh train # train neural sampler for example 4 - 10
./run.sh eval # evaluate(sampling) neural sampler for example 4 - 10
```

Once you have generated samples or downloaded our provided assets, you can reproduce tables and figures:
```bash
python reproduce.py table1 # compute metrics for example 1 - 3
python reproduce.py table2 # compute metrics for example 4 - 10
python reproduce.py fig1 # evolution
python reproduce.py fig2 # plot for example 1 - 3
python reproduce.py fig3 # plot for example 4 - 10
python reproduce.py fig4 # plot influences of preconditioner
python reproduce.py fig5 # compare original and hybrid MCMC methods
python reproduce.py fig6 # plot n-D moments
```

## How to extend to code

- **New Gaussian Mixtures**: append to the dictionary [`_EXAMPLES`](example.py)
- **New Flows/Other Distributions**: inherit the [`BaseDistribution`](distribution.py), and implement the log of Radon-Nikodym derivative `ln_scaled_ratio` method to run the MC Föllmer flow, and implement the `velocity_closed` method to run the closed Föllmer flow. Call [`fflow_sampler`](fflow.py) and pass the `velocity_fn` to it.
- **New MCMC samplers**: append to the [`mcmc_sampler.methods`](mcmc.py)


## References
This repository is built upon some previous repositories

> Schrödinger-Föllmer Sampler https://github.com/Liao-Xu/SFS_py

> Langevin Monte Carlo Algorithms https://github.com/Tom271/LangevinMC/blob/master/langevin_traj.py

If you find the code useful for your research, please consider citing

```bib
@misc{ding2023sampling,
      title={Sampling via F\"ollmer Flow}, 
      author={Zhao Ding and Yuling Jiao and Xiliang Lu and Zhijian Yang and Cheng Yuan},
      year={2023},
      eprint={2311.03660},
      archivePrefix={arXiv},
      primaryClass={stat.ME}
}
```

Commit message:

feat: Docker support, doc: add badges

README.md, after:

# Sampling via Föllmer Flow
This repo contains the implementation for the paper [Sampling via Föllmer Flow](https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.03660)

[![arXiv](https://img.shields.io/badge/arXiv-2311.03660-b31b1b.svg?style=for-the-badge)](https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.03660)
![Docker](https://img.shields.io/badge/docker-%230db7ed.svg?style=for-the-badge&logo=docker&logoColor=white)
![PyTorch](https://img.shields.io/badge/PyTorch-%23EE4C2C.svg?style=for-the-badge&logo=PyTorch&logoColor=white)
![Jupyter Notebook](https://img.shields.io/badge/jupyter-%23FA0F00.svg?style=for-the-badge&logo=jupyter&logoColor=white)
![Linux](https://img.shields.io/badge/Linux-FCC624?style=for-the-badge&logo=linux&logoColor=black)

## Brief

We introduce a novel **unit-time ODE flow** called the Föllmer flow, which efficiently transforms a Gaussian measure into a desired target measure at time 1. We apply Euler's method, where the velocity field is calculated either analytically or through **Monte Carlo** approximation using Gaussian samples. Time evolution of Föllmer flow on 8-mode gaussian mixtures is illustrated below:

![evolution](assets/evolution.png)

Through numerical experiments on mixture distributions in 1D, 2D, and  high-dimensional spaces, we demonstrate that the samples generated by our proposed flow exhibit **higher quality** compared to those obtained by several existing methods, especially for **multimodal** problems.

We also propose leveraging the Föllmer flow as a **warmstart** strategy for existing Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods, aiming to mitigate mode collapses and enhance their performance.

We can also leverage deep neural networks to fit  the trajectory of sample evaluations. This allows us to obtain a generator for **one-step** sampling as a result.

## Try the demo with Docker

Install [Docker](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/) first.

```bash
docker pull dingz489/fflow:demo-v0.1
docker run --rm -it -p 8888:8888 dingz489/fflow:demo-v0.1
```

Then enter `localhost:8888` in your browser, open the `demo.ipynb` and run it to reproduce the demo picture!

## Dependencies

```bash
pip install -r requirements
``` 

## Assets

Our assets (Föllmer flow/MCMC samples(.npz), neural Föllmer flow checkpoints(.pth), tables(.csv) and figures(.pdf,.png)) have been uploaded to [Google drive](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1GKR-L5Ak6dhPad8OP72oRP1EGJObIeZW?usp=sharing).

## Usage

```bash
.
├── Makefile
├── README.md
├── assets
├── distribution.py # abstract base class for general distribution, we implemented n-D Gaussian mixtures here
├── example.py # correspond to examples in table 3 of our paper
├── fflow.py # prototype of Föllmer flow
├── main.py # entrance for different routines (generate samples, train/eval networks)
├── mcmc.py # MCMC samplers prototype, modified from https://github.com/Tom271/LangevinMC/blob/master/langevin_traj.py
├── metric.py # compute MMD and W2 distance
├── misc.py # miscellaneous helper utilities
├── network.py # ResNet prototype
├── reproduce.py # entrance file to reproduce tables and figures from paper
├── requirements.txt
└── run.sh # bash scripts, calling main.py
```

Setup the name of your python environment in [run.sh](run.sh).

We provide bash scripts for generating samples in [`run.sh`](run.sh). If you wish to know how to use the entrance file [`main.py`](main.py), please refer to it for example.
```bash
./run.sh 1d # sampling from example 1 - 3, with Föllmer flow & MCMC
./run.sh 2d # sampling from example 4 - 10, with Föllmer flow & MCMC
./run.sh 2dmc # sampling from example 4 - 10, with MC Föllmer flow
./run.sh precondition # sampling from example 5, with different preconditioners
./run.sh hybrid # sampling from example 7, with predictor-corrector scheme
./run.sh nd # sampling from example 11 - 19, dimension ranges from 1 to 10
./run.sh train # train neural sampler for example 4 - 10
./run.sh eval # evaluate(sampling) neural sampler for example 4 - 10
```

Once you have generated samples or downloaded our provided assets, you can reproduce tables and figures:
```bash
python reproduce.py table1 # compute metrics for example 1 - 3
python reproduce.py table2 # compute metrics for example 4 - 10
python reproduce.py fig1 # evolution
python reproduce.py fig2 # plot for example 1 - 3
python reproduce.py fig3 # plot for example 4 - 10
python reproduce.py fig4 # plot influences of preconditioner
python reproduce.py fig5 # compare original and hybrid MCMC methods
python reproduce.py fig6 # plot n-D moments
```

## How to extend to code

- **New Gaussian Mixtures**: append to the dictionary [`_EXAMPLES`](example.py)
- **New Flows/Other Distributions**: inherit the [`BaseDistribution`](distribution.py), and implement the log of Radon-Nikodym derivative `ln_scaled_ratio` method to run the MC Föllmer flow, and implement the `velocity_closed` method to run the closed Föllmer flow. Call [`fflow_sampler`](fflow.py) and pass the `velocity_fn` to it.
- **New MCMC samplers**: append to the [`mcmc_sampler.methods`](mcmc.py)


## References
This repository is built upon some previous repositories

> Schrödinger-Föllmer Sampler https://github.com/Liao-Xu/SFS_py

> Langevin Monte Carlo Algorithms https://github.com/Tom271/LangevinMC/blob/master/langevin_traj.py

If you find the code useful for your research, please consider citing

```bib
@misc{ding2023sampling,
      title={Sampling via F\"ollmer Flow}, 
      author={Zhao Ding and Yuling Jiao and Xiliang Lu and Zhijian Yang and Cheng Yuan},
      year={2023},
      eprint={2311.03660},
      archivePrefix={arXiv},
      primaryClass={stat.ME}
}
```
